docs: virtual cluster migration guide (#6246)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/clusters/palette-virtual-clusters/migrate-virtual-clusters.md

---
sidebar_label: "Migrate Virtual Cluster Workloads"
title: "Migrate Virtual Cluster Workloads"
description: "Learn how to migrate workloads from one virtual cluster to another and delete legacy clusters."
icon: ""
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 20
tags: ["clusters", "cluster groups", "virtual clusters"]
---

It is sometimes necessary to migrate workloads from one virtual cluster to another. For instance, if a virtual cluster
cannot be upgraded, migrating its workloads becomes the only option. This guide provides high-level steps to help you
migrate workloads between virtual clusters and delete legacy virtual clusters. The steps in Palette need to be performed
in [cluster mode](../../introduction/palette-modes.md).

## Migrate Workloads to New Virtual Cluster

### Prerequisites

- Access to your legacy and new virtual clusters through [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/).

> - At a minimum, the
>   [**Virtual Cluster Admin**](../../user-management/palette-rbac/project-scope-roles-permissions.md#virtual-cluster)
>   role in Palette.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The
  [**Virtual Cluster Admin**](../../user-management/palette-rbac/project-scope-roles-permissions.md#virtual-cluster)
  role in Palette.
```

Any reason we are specifying "at a minimum" rather than just telling them they need this permission?

Author: No, not sure why I wrote it like that. Will adjust as per your suggestion.

- The necessary prerequisites to create a new cluster group to host the virtual clusters. Refer to
  [Create and Manage Cluster Groups - Prerequisites](../cluster-groups/create-cluster-group.md#prerequisites) for
  guidance.

### Migrate Workloads

You can use multiple methods to migrate workloads between clusters. This guide covers one of them being a manual export

> and import of YAML manifests.

Author: @achuribooks We cannot document all methods, so I'm documenting the most common one. PM are also aligned in this, as every customer may do this differently. We just need to give them general guidance.

> You can use multiple methods to migrate workloads between clusters. This guide covers one of them being a manual export
> and import of YAML manifests.

Author: ```suggestion
This guide covers a common method of migrating workloads between clusters, which is a manual export
and import of YAML manifests.
```

   :::

7. [Deploy new virtual clusters](./deploy-virtual-cluster.md) to your new cluster group. These will replace your legacy
   clusters so it is advisable to set the same amount of maximum resources to each new virtual cluster.

8. Apply your YAML manifests to each new virtual cluster using `kubectl`.

   For example, create the namespace for the resource on the new cluster if it does not exist.

   ```shell hideClipboard title="Example namespace creation"
   kubectl create namespace my-namespace
   ```

   ```shell hideClipboard title="Example output"
   namespace/my-namespace created
   ```

   Then, import the YAML manifest to the new cluster.

   ```shell hideClipboard title="Service import example"
   kubectl apply --filename my-app-service.yaml
   ```

   ```shell hideClipboard title="Example output"
   service/my-app-service created
   ```

9. If needed, adjust your DNS records to point at the new ingress or load balancer IPs of the new virtual clusters.

10. Migrate any persistent data to the storage accessible to the new virtual clusters, if required.

11. Modify any application and CI/CD pipelines to point at the new virtual clusters.

### Validate

> 1. Check that your deployments and pods are active on new virtual clusters using `kubectl`.

Reviewer: Similar to my other comment: do they need to log in to Palette and grab the kubeconfig first?

   Name:             my-app-ingress
   Namespace:        my-namespace
   Address:          203.0.113.10
   Default backend:  <default>
   Rules:
     Host                 Path  Backends
     ----                 ----  --------
     example.com
                          /     my-app-service:80 (10.44.0.2:8080,10.44.0.3:8080)
   Annotations:
     kubernetes.io/ingress.class: nginx
     nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/rewrite-target: /
   Events:
     Type    Reason             Age               From                      Message
     ----    ------             ----              ----                      -------
     Normal  CreateCertificate  1m                cert-manager-controller   Successfully created Certificate "my-app-tls"
     Normal  IPAllocated        1m                nginx-ingress-controller  Assigned IP or LB address
     Normal  UpdateIngress      50s (x2 over 1m)  nginx-ingress-controller  Ingress my-app-ingress configuration updated
   ```

## Delete Legacy Virtual Clusters

If all workloads have been fully migrated to a new virtual cluster, or your virtual cluster is no longer required, use
the steps in this section to delete your legacy clusters.

### Prerequisites

> - At a minimum, the
>   [**Virtual Cluster Admin**](../../user-management/palette-rbac/project-scope-roles-permissions.md#virtual-cluster)
>   role in Palette.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The
  [**Virtual Cluster Admin**](../../user-management/palette-rbac/project-scope-roles-permissions.md#virtual-cluster)
  role in Palette.
```

### Delete Clusters

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com).

> 2. In the left main menu, select **Clusters** and click on the **Virtual Clusters** tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. On the left main menu, select **Clusters** and click on the **Virtual Clusters** tab.
```

3. Locate and click on the virtual cluster that you want to delete.

4. Click on the **Settings** drop-down menu and select **Delete Cluster**.

> 5. Enter the cluster name and click **OK**. The cluster status will then change to **Deleting**.
> 
>    The virtual cluster will then be deprovisioned and deleted. This may take up to 10 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Enter the cluster name and click **OK**. The cluster status will change to **Deleting**.

   Wait for the virtual cluster to be deprovisioned and deleted. This may take up to 10 minutes.
```

6. If you have deleted all virtual clusters in a cluster group, you can then
   [delete your cluster group](../cluster-groups/create-cluster-group.md#delete-your-cluster-group).

### Validate

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com).

> 2. In the left main menu, select **Clusters** and click on the **Virtual Clusters** tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. On the left main menu, select **Clusters** and click on the **Virtual Clusters** tab.
```

3. Check that your virtual clusters are no longer displayed. You can also click the **Show Deleted** checkbox to show
   deleted virtual clusters.

> 4. If you have deleted your cluster group, navigate to the left main menu and select **Cluster Groups**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If you deleted your cluster group, navigate to the left main menu and select **Cluster Groups**.
```

---
sidebar_label: "Migrate Virtual Cluster Workloads"
title: "Migrate Virtual Cluster Workloads"
description: "Learn how to migrate workloads from one virtual cluster to another and delete legacy clusters."
icon: ""
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 20
tags: ["clusters", "cluster groups", "virtual clusters"]
---

> It is sometimes necessary to migrate workloads from one virtual cluster to another. For instance, if a virtual cluster
> cannot be upgraded due to breaking changes, migrating its workloads becomes the only option.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is sometimes necessary to migrate workloads from one virtual cluster to another. For instance, if a virtual cluster cannot be upgraded, migrating its workloads becomes the only option.
```

This guide provides high-level steps to help you migrate workloads between virtual clusters and delete legacy virtual
clusters. The steps in Palette need to be performed in [cluster mode](../../introduction/palette-modes.md).

## Migrate Workloads to New Virtual Cluster

### Prerequisites

> - Access to your virtual cluster through [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/).

Reviewer 2: virtual clusterS? I assume you need access to both

Author: Good call out.

Author: ```suggestion
- Access to your legacy and new virtual clusters through [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/).
```

- At a minimum, the
  [**Virtual Cluster Admin**](../../user-management/palette-rbac/project-scope-roles-permissions.md#virtual-cluster)
  role in Palette.

- The necessary prerequisites to create a new cluster group to host the virtual clusters. Refer to
  [Create and Manage Cluster Groups - Prerequisites](../cluster-groups/create-cluster-group.md#prerequisites) for
  guidance.

### Migrate Workloads

> There are multiple methods to migrate workloads between clusters. This guide covers one of them being a manual export

Author: ```suggestion
You can use multiple methods to migrate workloads between clusters. This guide covers one of them being a manual export
```

   same host clusters that are used for your legacy virtual clusters or select different ones.

   :::warning

   If using the same host clusters for your new cluster group, ensure there are enough resources for both the legacy and
   new virtual clusters to claim.

   :::

7. [Deploy new virtual clusters](./deploy-virtual-cluster.md) to your new cluster group. These will replace your legacy
   clusters so it is advisable to set the same amount of maximum resources to each new virtual cluster.

8. Apply your YAML manifests to each new virtual cluster using `kubectl`.

   For example, create the namespace for the resource on the new cluster if it does not exist.

   ```shell hideClipboard title="Example namespace creation"
   kubectl create namespace my-namespace
   ```

   ```shell hideClipboard title="Example output"
   namespace/my-namespace created
   ```

   Then, import the YAML manifest to the new cluster.

   ```shell hideClipboard title="Service import example"
   kubectl apply --filename my-app-service.yaml
   ```

   ```shell hideClipboard title="Example output"
   service/my-app-service created
   ```

> 9. If needed, adjust your DNS records to point at the new ingress or loadbalancer IPs of the new virtual clusters.

Author: ```suggestion
9. If needed, adjust your DNS records to point at the new ingress or load balancer IPs of the new virtual clusters.
```
